Good morning everyone.
I'm Travis Brown,
I'm the graphics and imaging evangelist,
and I'd like to welcome
you to session 500,
which is a graphics and imaging overview.
Hopefully you all had the opportunity
yesterday to see an exciting
new announcement that we made,
Quartz Extreme.
Quartz Extreme is a fantastic
new technology that leverages
the power of Mac OS X to take
our compositing window model,
the Quartz Compositor,
and drive that in conjunction with our
really excellent OpenGL implementation
to do something that's industry leading.
In fact,
we're two years ahead of the competition,
delivering a fully composited
GPU leveraging windowing system,
and a lot of those tools and
techniques that we use to do that
are available to you as developers.
The interesting thing is the
Quartz Compositor is not the
only big announcement we have.
All throughout the graphics
technology stack in Jaguar,
we have new developments,
and that's what the
purpose of this session is,
to communicate the new things that
we've been up to over the past year,
and how we've taken the power
of Mac OS X and harnessed it to
do new and interesting things.
That's what the purpose
of this session is,
to communicate the new things that
we've been up to over the past year,
and how we've taken the power
of Mac OS X and harnessed it to
do new and interesting things.
That's what the purpose
of this session is,
to communicate the new things that
we've been up to over the past year,
and how we've taken the power
of Mac OS X and harnessed it to
do new and interesting things.
So what I'd like to do is have
you welcome Peter Graffagnino,
the Director of Graphics
and Imaging Engineering,
to stage, and he'll take you
through the presentation.
Thank you.
Thanks, Travis.
Hey everybody, welcome to WWDC.
Hope you're going to
have a great conference.
We've got a lot of interesting
stuff in the graphics areas,
as Travis said, so please attend all the
sessions I'm going to talk
about here and point you to,
and enjoy the demos
we have for you today.
The basic agenda is to do a loop through
all the technologies we have in terms
of graphics and imaging on the platform.
That's Quartz 2D, OpenGL,
the Quartz Compositor with the
new accelerated implementation
called Quartz Extreme,
ColorSync, Image Capture, and printing.
I'm going to do a brief
overview of each technology.
Some of it might be a
little bit of a review,
but I think we have some new people here
this year who haven't seen it before.
Then I'm going to focus
on what's new in Jaguar.
and also show you some demos.
So let's get started.
Architecture diagram,
you've all seen this for a few years.
The graphics stack sit right above the
Core OS and below the Frameworks layer.
And the three primary
interactive technologies we have,
APIs you can call to
get bits on the screen,
are Quartz, the 2D graphics library.
For 3D, we have OpenGL.
And for video and multimedia,
we have QuickTime.
So first I'll talk a
little bit about Quartz.
Quartz 2D, as we call it,
is our 2D imaging model that's
based on the industry standard
PostScript and PDF imaging model.
This imaging model's probably
printed every page you've
read in the last 20 years,
15 years or so.
But it's really been industry proven.
It's got a very robust model for fonts,
line art, graphics, sampled images.
And what Quartz 2D really is is just
a straightforward C library that's an
implementation of that imaging model.
So there's no real language
built into Quartz 2D.
It's really just an
immediate mode graphics API.
What we did do was we added PDF read
and write capability to the library
because we wanted a metafile format.
In fact, we kind of arrived at the API by
working backwards from the metafile,
knowing we wanted to record
and play back 2D as PDF.
And then what kind of
images we wanted to have.
And then what kind of C API would
we want on top of that that would be
relatively straightforward to use.
The other thing we knew is we wanted
to use a lot of nicely anti-aliased
content in the user interface,
have alpha composited icons,
have nice looking text.
And so we knew it had to be really fast.
So we have a really fast
anti-aliasing algorithm in there
that's pretty state of the art.
And we're pretty proud of that.
The other thing I didn't mention
last year but I think is important
to understand about Quartz 2D.
Is it has the concept
of destination alpha.
Which basically means that it records
the coverage information as it's drawing.
So this is pretty powerful.
Not only do you get the RGB value
for every pixel you draw,
you get a coverage value.
So for example,
you can clear a canvas to a clear
color and record in the alpha
just the bits that are shown.
So you can create, for example,
an overlay pretty easily
using the destination alpha.
The other thing that's pretty
important about a 2D graphics
library is the font support.
And fortunately,
Apple's been at this for a while,
and we have a really good type
system called Apple Type System,
which is built in the Quartz 2D.
So for all of the PDF font handling,
Apple Type System handles both TrueType,
and we also have a Type 1
scaler that we got from Adobe.
So whether it's TrueType, Type 1,
or whatever,
we can render it with Quartz 2D.
And finally,
another thing Apple's been at
for a while is color management,
and we have ColorSync built in.
The color processing model of PDF is
pretty similar to the ICC model that
has been a standard for a while.
And so Quartz 2D,
when it has to do color calculations,
just builds a color world and
uses ColorSync to do that.
So what's new in Quartz 2D?
Well, there's some new features.
There's a full PDF 1.3 support,
which includes gradients and patterns.
We, in fact,
have API for linear and radial gradients,
and we have patterns.
These are full vector patterns,
not like quick draw patterns you
might have been familiar with,
but basically arbitrary graphics can be,
you know,
step and repeat through the page.
We have transparency in PDF.
We don't have the full 1.4
transparency model yet,
but we have the alpha and alpha image
calls that we've had in Quartz 2D for a
while now get recorded and played back
using the 1.4 transparency operators.
We also have PDF X3 support.
PDF X3 is a graphic arts standard
that's emerging for file exchange and
graphic arts based on the PDF 1.3 spec.
You have to add a little extra
metadata to the file to get it to work,
but we have that coming in.
Jaguar.
The other important
thing I wanted to make,
if you went to the keynote yesterday,
you heard Avi kind of touch on using
native services in your applications.
And I think a prime example
of this is Quartz 2D.
We've actually made it pretty easy
from a Carbon application to intermix
your QuickDraw and Quartz 2D calls.
We don't necessarily expect
every large Carbon application to
rip out all of their QuickDraw,
but for certain areas
it might make sense.
And one example of this is Excel and
what the guys at Microsoft did
with the Excel charting engine.
So, for example,
here's a graphic the way you
might see it on OS 9 Excel.
You'll notice you have jaggies
and the rotated text and kind of
a straightforward looking graphic.
But then with Quartz 2D,
they were able to add transparency.
And I apologize for the
scaling of the slide.
PowerPoint didn't do a great job on that.
Probably not using Quartz 2D yet.
The rotation of the text
you can see is much nicer.
In fact, you know, when this prints,
the rotated text shows up in the file
as real fonts rather than bitmaps.
And so all of that is very nice and
gets them better printing as well.
So they took their chart engine,
which is obviously not all of Office,
and were able to bring that over
to Quartz 2D pretty reasonably.
So anyway, keep that in mind.
There's a couple of things
we've done to make Quartz 2D a
little easier coming from the
Carbon world and QuickDraw world.
We've added Quartz.
We've added Picked
rendering with Quartz 2D.
This has actually been
in for a little while.
But we basically take the same logic
in the LaserWriter 8 driver on OS 9,
if you're familiar with that,
which basically takes QuickDraw
calls and converts it to the
PostScript imaging model.
And we've converted that to take
the QuickDraw calls and make
Core graphics calls or Quartz 2D
calls to enable the playback of
Picked through a Quartz 2D context.
And so that gives you the WYSIWYG fonts
and allows you to convert Picked
to PDF and all those features.
So that's, you know,
if you're used to Picked,
that's one thing you can do.
One thing I don't have on the slide that
I should mention is EPS support as well.
You can also get
EPS through Core graphics.
So if that's one of the reasons why you
feel you need to stay with QuickDraw,
we do have API in Quartz to
handle embedded EPS that will pass
through to a PostScript printer.
QuickDraw text rendering with Quartz
2D is another thing we've added,
which is the ability to, you know,
use Quartz 2D to run a lot
of the work that we do.
So that's one thing we've added.
And then we also have the ability to
take Draw text calls and have them call
Quartz 2D's rendering facilities to
get anti-alias text through QuickDraw.
There's a couple of
modes that can run in.
It can run in a metric-compatible
mode with OS 9 if you can't
afford your layout to change.
In that case, you know,
the text doesn't look as great as it
could if you turn that mode off and you
just use the natural metrics of the font.
And in some situations,
you're able to do that,
That's the way you get the best text.
So we have some sessions on Quartz 2D.
In fact, later this afternoon,
I think it's in this room,
there'll be Quartz 2D in PDF to
kind of give you an update
on what's new in Quartz 2D.
If you want to hear more about ColorSync,
there's a session 509 on Wednesday.
And finally,
the Graphics and Image Performance Tuning
session on Friday at 3.30 is
going to be a pretty good one.
A lot of tips and techniques on
how to get your application to
run faster and take advantage of
Quartz 2D and the graphics system.
So with that,
I'm going to move on to OpenGL.
OpenGL is our 3D graphics library.
It's, again,
an industry standard technology.
It's been around for a long time.
It was originally the
GL library on the SGI machines.
It's been kind of an open
standard for maybe about 10 years.
We work pretty hard with our partners,
our OEMs, NVIDIA and ATI,
to get really good
drivers into the system.
And those guys are really pushing
the state of the art in terms of what
can be done with graphics hardware.
And actually,
I have a demo of some of the
latest stuff I can get demo 2 up.
So this is a Wolfman demo from
NVIDIA running on the GeForce
4 Ti card we have in here.
And you can see this is all using
OpenGL and some of the latest
extensions that NVIDIA added
that we've put in Jaguar as
well to allow per-pixel shading.
I think this guy's
about 100,000 polygons,
100,000 triangles.
He's got self-shaded fur.
I can figure out how to stop him here.
Let's see, shift.
[Transcript missing]
Can I get back to the slide machine,
please?
So, and obviously GL,
one of the big reasons why we
have it is for great game support,
and this is 4x4 Evolution 2,
which has some really great graphics.
But it's more than just about games.
I mean,
we feel pretty strongly that there
are a lot of applications out
there that want to use 3D that,
you know, are not just, you know,
take over the screen
immersive experiences.
So there's a lot of packages out there.
I won't go through the whole list here,
but a lot of people are kind of jumping
on OS X because they're realizing the
combination of kind of Unix and OpenGL,
which, you know,
has been a traditional market for them,
is actually here on OS X.
And makes it pretty easy for
them to bring things over.
So if I get the demo
machine back again...
I'll bring up the TweakWaves demo,
which I don't know if you saw at
the Macworld session in January.
But this is a company
that is in San Francisco.
They do special effects.
They specialize in physical
simulations of pretty hard phenomena
for the special effects industry.
So they have a good wave simulator.
And what they wanted to do,
they have this engine is
all just straight ahead,
pretty portable, Unix C code.
And what they did is they
spent a little bit of time with
Cocoa and put a straightforward
user interface on top of it,
where, you know, they have some pretty
basic controls here.
You can change the behavior of the model,
crank down the resolution,
the crest sharpness, things like that.
They have an appearance thing where
you can have an environment map
and throw in some geometry there.
But the nice thing
about this is they have,
you know, this physics engine that
is very sophisticated.
And you can imagine taking an application
like this and wrapping it up and kind of,
you know, if you're trying to bid
on a job or something,
you say, "Here's what I can do.
Here's all the controls.
You know, you can go tweak my
algorithm and tell me if,
you know,
you can get a good effect for your
film." And he doesn't have to,
you know, sit over the shoulder with
the art director or whatever
to kind of get the effect.
He can just say, you know,
"Tell me the settings you like and I'll
go run you some frames." So I think
that's a pretty powerful story to have,
you know, just an engine code written
in straightforward C wrapped
in a Cocoa user interface.
And if you went to the session yesterday,
I think you saw an IB demo where
they actually turned this into
an interface builder palette and
ran it in Photoshop as a plug-in.
So pretty impressive.
Let me go back to slides.
Thanks.
So let me spend a few minutes
on Mac OS X OpenGL and talk
about the architecture there.
It's really a
state-of-the-art architecture.
We approached the whole problem as
more of an OS resource management
problem rather than kind of a dedicated,
hardwired game console architecture
because we knew we wanted to
host a lot of applications.
We knew we wanted to accelerate
the whole desktop with OpenGL,
so we had to be very careful
about our resource optimizations,
make sure when an application wanted
everything it could out of the GPU,
everything else paged off and
it can get entire access to it.
When there are a bunch
of applications going,
they share it pretty reasonably.
So there's a lot of optimizations
in the resource virtualization.
There's data flow optimizations
as well to try to get textures to
the screen as fast as possible.
And with some of the Quartz
Extreme technology that you've seen,
it's really a great tool to bring to
people who are used to doing overlays.
The other important thing is that
Apple co-develops the drivers.
We work with NVIDIA and
ATI on their drivers.
We're in constant contact
with their engineering teams.
We have the source code.
We can make changes,
and that allows us to do
single-stop shopping for developers.
If developers need a certain
path tuned through the system,
we can do it once,
and it'll work across all the hardware.
Which is really nice.
And so we can respond very
quickly to your request.
If you need a new feature, for example.
It takes a few years to get
things in the hardware sometimes,
but if there's some application
you think would be really cool,
we can talk to the vendors.
And since we write them checks,
we can say, "Hey,
could you throw this in the chip?"
The other thing that's important
is it allows us to maintain
consistency across the product line.
I mean,
we do support vendor-specific extensions,
so we don't take a new product line.
We don't take an extremely
hard line on that,
because we realize there's a lot
of innovation in things like pixel
programming and stuff like that.
But we do want to maintain things
as consistently as possible.
So for example,
non-power-of-two texturing.
NVIDIA has an extension.
ATI has an extension.
We just did one,
and we made it work on everything.
The other thing is,
since we work closely with the
vendors and write them big checks,
is that we have a lot of
visibility into what's going
on with 3D graphics hardware.
So we can help push your requests,
as I was saying,
and sometimes we can find a unique
solution if you have a problem.
Since we can kind of see the whole stack,
we can understand exactly where the
best place to meet your need would be.
And we're also starting to take more
of a leadership role in the OpenGL ARB.
The ARB is the
Architecture Review Board for OpenGL,
where all of the standard is set.
And Apple has been extremely
vocal recently with trying to
get the vendors to converge on a
vertex programming specification.
And we think that's
going along really well.
In fact, that's in your CD.
So what's new in OpenGL for Jaguar?
Well, there's a whole lot.
There's programmable shaders,
so we have programming at the
vertex and the pixel level.
A lot of system integration features.
We've got real great improvements
in texture upload performance.
Lots of new extensions
and some amazing tools.
And a lot of the work
that we did for OpenGL,
we had to do for the
Quartz Extreme effort.
And we kind of made the bet that, hey,
you know,
if we're going to try to run the
windowing system through OpenGL,
I'll bet all the performance
optimizations we have to do to OpenGL are
just going to make OpenGL even better.
And that really turned out to be true.
So for example, programmable shaders.
We have vertex shading based on the
Arb Vertex program proposed standard.
Pixel and texture shading,
the vendors have not quite
converged on that yet,
so we're currently using the
vendor-specific extensions.
On the NVIDIA side,
there's Texture Shader 1, 2, 3,
and register combiners.
And on the ATI side,
I think it's actually ATI, not ATI-X,
fragment program.
We have a great new tool
for Vertex programs called
the OpenGL Shader Builder.
It's kind of a mini-IDE for
developing little shading programs.
I've got on the left my
program window where I can talk
about the-- enter code and have
it syntax-checked in real time.
I've got a preview of what I'm doing.
I've got a complete register dump of
the state of the vertex processor.
We can actually run it in
software emulation mode,
so you can actually examine registers
as you step through the code.
We've got documentation
for the various commands.
You can, you know,
click on a command and see a
little syntax of how to use it.
So it's a real powerful tool.
If you go to the session
on vertex programming,
I think you'll be pretty
impressed with that.
System integration-- again,
a lot of this work came from doing
the windowing system on top of GL.
So quartz on a texture.
We've got really high-quality
2D anti-aliasing in quartz,
and it matches up well with the
ARGB texture formats that we
have optimized in our OpenGL.
So you can basically get quartz
to draw into an ARGB texture,
and that's a pre-multiplied texture,
which you can then use in a scene
with the appropriate blending modes,
and you get really nice
text in your OpenGL,
and it's very straightforward.
The other important thing, obviously,
was video if we're gonna be running
the windowing system through OpenGL.
So we have non-power-of-two textures.
We have YUV texture formats,
a variety of formats required there.
The other thing,
now that the windowing system
is on top of GL as well,
is it allows us to do things like
overlays in a much more natural way,
rather than having, you know,
separate planes of the frame buffer.
You actually have just another
off-screen surface in video memory
that you can render and update
at whatever frequency you want,
and you can render your GL underneath
and the windowing system will
just keep compositing those
every frame update for you.
And that allows, you know,
pretty interesting new heads-up
user interfaces for 3D apps,
I think, where, you know,
you're not constrained by an overlay
system where you have to give,
you know, concrete per-pixel ownership.
You could have a
translucent user interface,
like a drag selection over 3D content,
that sort of thing.
So we think that'll be a good
thing to take advantage of.
Texture upload performance,
we put a lot of work into this.
We have direct EMA from all of the
native kind of Mac texture formats
with no per-pixel CPU involvement.
What this means is when you call
GL Text Image 2D or something like that,
GL does not actually copy the data.
If you put it in client texture mode,
it'll just refer the data and
then dynamically map it into
AGP when it needs to use it.
Now this obviously introduces
a synchronization issue.
If you're going to go
and touch that texture,
you need to know that the
hardware is done with it.
So we have a fence primitive that
you can insert after that texture,
and when the pipe clears that texture,
you can wait on that fence and have it go
on with your work and update the texture.
So these things were
particularly important in
doing the Quartz Extreme work.
And here's the, I think,
pretty accurate list of 30 or more
extensions that we're adding in Jaguar.
You can see there's a
combination of Apple extensions,
where we tried to synthesize
things that were out there already.
There's ARB extensions from
the Architecture Review Board.
Then there's some
multi-vendor extensions,
those are the EXTs.
And then there's some
proprietary extensions,
a bunch of things from ATI and
from NVIDIA for doing all the real
low-level pixel programming stuff.
So anyway, we think people are going to
be pretty excited about that.
We had an OpenGL early
bird session on Sunday,
and people were pretty blown
away by the new features there,
so great.
OpenGL Profiler is another really
interesting tool that we have.
It's kind of a performance analysis
console that allows you to attach
basically to anything that's running,
any OpenGL application that's running.
You can attach to it.
You can get a complete list of the
OpenGL calls and their frequencies,
how often it's being made.
You can get a call dump of all
the arguments to all the calls.
You can get a hardware
performance monitor.
You can trace VRAM used.
You can trace hardware wait
time on various queues.
You can trace, I don't know,
command buffer wait time.
You know, there's about 30 different
little items you can measure.
And you can attach to applications
and get all these great statistics.
And we've had some developers in
and gave them a sneak peek at this,
and people are able to get incredible,
I mean,
the low-hanging fruit out there on
some of the apps is pretty amazing.
So I won't embarrass anyone,
but the tool like this.
The great thing about this tool, too, is,
you know, there are some performance
profilers out there that some
of the hardware vendors do,
which are quite good.
But the issue there is
then you've got to learn,
you know, ATI's tool set or NVIDIA's
tool set to be able to do that.
And, you know,
they don't always have the time
to port those things to the Mac.
But now we have one central tool
that you can use in your apps.
And whether you're running on
ATI hardware or NVIDIA hardware,
you can see where you're waiting.
So we think that's a pretty nice thing.
Great.
Keep it up.
OpenGL guys are in the audience,
I like that.
So we got a bunch of
sessions on OpenGL going on.
We've got the programmability
session late today in this room,
I guess.
We've got two sessions tomorrow on
what we call integrated graphics.
And these are all things in the
area of doing video on the texture,
doing 2D on the texture.
In the 5.06 session, we're gonna,
in fact,
show you how to build kind of your
own little Quartz extreme using
all the stuff we learned and all
the extensions for doing really
fast layer handling in OpenGL.
And that's gonna be a sample
code that we just give away.
And in 5.13,
there's an advanced 3D session.
I think we're gonna get
a guest speaker for that.
Is that confirmed?
Shout it out?
No?
Yes?
Maybe.
Well, go to that session.
It promises to be good.
OpenGL performance optimizations are
going to talk you through some of the
common pitfalls in OpenGL programming
and also look at the tools,
the profiler, show you how to use that.
So the last sort of drawing
API that we have is QuickTime.
I'm not really going to
talk a lot about QuickTime.
You saw some of the demos in the keynote.
QuickTime with QuickTime 6 and MPEG-4,
obviously really big news.
There's a whole track tomorrow
on QuickTime in this room,
and there's also some sessions on Friday,
so don't forget about those.
Okay,
so those are kind of all the APIs you
can use to get data to the screen.
There's another important
piece of technology on OS X,
which is the windowing system itself.
And that's what we call
the Quartz Compositor.
We talked about this last year,
but the basic notion is
you've got application content
from arbitrary drawing APIs,
and the Quartz Compositor is responsible
for presenting those on the display.
And so the nice thing about this
is it realizes the orthogonality
between the composition of the
desktop and a graphics API.
So all graphics APIs are peers,
whether they're hardware
accelerated or rendered in software.
We get the pixels to the screen
in the fastest way possible
and present them to the user.
So we think the Compositor
architecture could outlast any
graphics API that's out there.
It gives us a lot of
flexibility moving forward.
If a new graphics API comes along,
we can just add it in
and it'll get composited.
So this borrows some principles that have
been known in computer graphics for a
while called digital image composition.
In the paper in 1984,
Porter and Duff introduced the
alpha channel and alpha compositing.
And back in those days,
it was you had one program that
could do spheres and another
program that could do terrain.
And if you wanted to do a scene,
you didn't want to run
them both all the time.
So you needed a way to
kind of mix the content.
And, you know,
that's sort of analogous to, you know,
fast forward 20 years.
What we're doing today is
we've got applications.
We don't want them all
redrawing every screen update.
We want to be able to recomposite the
display as one element is changing.
So we're just applying those techniques
in real time with the Windows system.
So that allows us to do, you know,
a windowing system like this
where we've got QuickTime.
We have the Wolf demo you saw.
We've got the Translator.
We've got the Transparent
Terminal with the volume control
all being composited together.
You know,
obviously the great looking Aqua icons
and all that stuff clock in the corner.
You see that CPU monitor's
up pretty high.
What are we gonna do about that?
So just to review the model,
So applications drawn to buffers,
and then the buffers are composited
together onto the screen.
So, as you saw the CPU meter there,
the model can be computationally
expensive in some cases if
there's a lot of transparency,
particularly if you're trying to blend,
say, video, say,
the volume control with video
or DVD or something like that.
And we also get issues with people
who are concerned that we've
taken away the frame buffer.
But we haven't been able to tell the
whole story of why we're going in
this direction until this conference.
So, we've been working on Quartz
Extreme for a long time,
and the whole driver architecture
on OS X is based around it.
So,
it's kind of nice to be able to finally,
you know, tell you guys what we're up to.
Which is,
we really see GPUs kind of taking over
the presentation aspect of the desktop.
And so,
we went and we implemented the Quartz
compositing logic on top of OpenGL.
The nice thing about that is
that it completely removes the
transparency tax for video in 3D.
So, you can have layers of terminal.
On top of 3D and video,
and everything just works.
It frees up the CPU to do useful work
while the screen composite's going on.
And it allows us to kind of showcase
the GPU and the user interface.
So, if you have, like,
some screen animation,
maybe it works a little better
on a higher-end machine.
Maybe there's some little flourish to it
that we put in for our high-end users.
But we really think that we're
going to get a lot of advantages
out of something like that.
And as I said,
since it's all available to you,
you guys can do that too.
So, with that, let's do a demo.
If I can get the demo, demo two.
So kind of the first thing to see
is the translucent terminal demo.
Oh, these are great.
That was a great demo.
Let me get my CPU monitor going here.
One of the things I have
is a little frame counter.
So this just kind of shows you the
frame rate we get on the display.
So I've got about three layers.
It subtracts out itself,
so that's why it sits at zero.
We've got about three layers
of terminal going on here,
and you can see what happens
when I start to drag a window.
[Transcript missing]
Add a few more layers and there it is.
So, that's pretty cool.
Thanks.
But wait.
So one of the things that we
weren't able to do before Jaguar
was be able to really have 3D take
its proper place in this scene.
I mean, you always had 3D with a
black rectangle around it,
and it was just blasting to the hardware.
But now, with Quartz Extreme,
we can just put 3D in a layer,
and then add-- you can see that
gear is actually transparent,
and it's animating,
and it's in its own layer in the system.
And you can see I'm getting
pretty good frame rate.
So the 3D is somehow able to get over 60.
I'll have to ask the 3D guys
how they pulled that one off.
Here's a couple more little
widgets we can get going here.
And we're pretty much pegged
at 70 frames a second here.
So, and they're all on their own layers,
as you would expect.
What was I going to do next?
Let's bring up another
3D widget on the desktop,
which is the NVIDIA Chameleon.
So the guys went in and they took
the NVIDIA Chameleon demo and kind
of stripped out the vine he walks on.
I don't know if you guys
have seen this demo.
And made him render
on a clear background.
And then Quartz Extreme comes
in and composites him in.
So he's actually transparent.
You know, he's running with, you know,
full vertex shading
and all of that stuff,
just getting blended into the desktop,
you know.
[Transcript missing]
We were talking to the guy
who works on the screensavers,
Mike Trent, about the Quartz Extreme,
and he's like, "You know,
I could take the screensavers and just
run them in the background because
everything's getting composited.
So what's the window number
to get between the desktop and
the icons?" And so we're like,
"Eh, well..." So we told Mike.
[Transcript missing]
- Cruising along about
60 frames a second,
everything's pretty interactive.
This is a GeForce 4 TI in here,
so it's not breaking
much of the sweat yet.
I think if you go to
Ken Dyke's session later,
you'll try to see where it breaks down.
This thing's got 10 gigabytes per second
of memory bandwidth on the video card,
so probably a number you haven't
really dealt with before.
So I think that's enough on that demo.
Great, thanks.
So a few things I wanted to talk
about on kind of a different level
than you might see in the kind of
keynote demo of this kind of stuff,
but kind of why architecturally
we're moving towards this
fully accelerated desktop.
And it kind of goes back to just first
principles of computer architecture,
looking at programmed I.O.
versus DMA.
You know, in programmed I.O.
model, traditionally the CPU, you know,
maps in some registers and pushes
on data to send it to a device.
The problem is that the difference,
you know, in the compute capacity of a,
say,
gigahertz CPU and a 100 megahertz I.O.
bus is pretty inefficient.
So traditionally what people have done
is they've moved to a DMA-based I.O.
model where you tell the device
you want it to take its commands
or its data from a certain area,
and you tell it to go,
and then it just directly
pulls the memory to the device,
and you can check when it's done
or get an interrupt or however the
driver architecture wants to do it.
And that allows the CPU to proceed.
And do something else while the I.O.
is occurring.
Because I.O.
is really basically a pretty
straightforward thing,
and there's no reason to, you know,
spend your CPU doing it.
So if you think about it,
the CPU drawing in the frame buffer,
and the reason we took it away,
is the CPU really is,
it really is just programmed I.O.
is what you're doing.
That's not a very
efficient way to do things.
And the cards have plenty of bandwidth
to pull the data out of system memory
while you're doing something else.
And you can get much higher frame rates
DMA-ing your content up to the screen.
and you can actually try to reach out
over the bus and touch pixels anyway.
Another interesting kind of thing
that's going on in the industry is
the difference between CPUs and GPUs.
CPUs typically have a higher clock rate,
but they do less work because they
can't be parallelized as much.
You know,
you think of them hitting little
4K pages and taking little sips
of water out of the memory system,
whereas a GPU is just
sort of gulping along,
chunking through, you know,
gigabytes per second.
The other thing is people
in the industry have kind of
quipped this Moore's Law cubed,
which is the fact that if
you look in recent history,
the GPU performance is doubling
about every six months versus the
standard rule of thumb for CPUs,
which is 18 months.
So that's kind of a cubed factor
and 3X the exponent there.
The other thing is to look
at the transistor counts.
Since graphics is such
a parallel problem,
you can just duplicate out.
You can just duplicate out
the same pipeline and do
more and more pixels at once.
And so that's an extra degree of
freedom that the CPU guys don't have.
So for example,
GeForce 4 Ti has 63 million transistors
in it compared to 10 million in a G4.
So pretty impressive what's going on.
And obviously, you know, again,
it's not just for games.
We think there's a lot of things
that we all can do with it,
both in the desktop user experience
and in your applications,
to take advantage of all that hardware.
So a block diagram of Quartz Extreme.
Basically what happens is the
application draws its content,
whether it's software
rendered or hardware rendered,
into some kind of buffer,
whether it's a window backing
store in system memory or
a surface in video memory.
And then the Quartz Compositor
programs the GPU with OpenGL to just
pull all of that data up into the
GPU and composite it onto the display.
So for surfaces that
are in system memory,
like the window backing store
that's happening over the AGP bus,
for surfaces that may already
have the gears rendered in it,
it's just turning around and treating
that GL buffer as a texture to
feed into the final composite.
We're going to talk more about this in
the Quartz Extreme session later today.
So the other thing that's
interesting to point out is
Apple is leading the industry here,
but everyone else is going to do
this because it's sort of the natural
evolution of windowing systems.
And there's been lots of sort of hacks
out there to try to do transparent
menus and little flourishes in the
UI that need this kind of performance.
But we really wanted to just do it
right and get it done with so that we
could just ride the headroom of the GPU.
And we think it is kind
of an inflection point,
to use a fancy word,
in platform graphics architecture,
that now that GPUs are all kind of doing
similar architectures in terms of DMA in
both command data and texture data,
we think we can just treat them a
lot more like we treat regular I.O.
devices and really just kind of
use traditional OS and operating
system techniques to manage them
and bring out their performance
to their fullest potential.
And the great thing about all of
this... The advances we've made in
OpenGL to kind of make all of this
work and be well-behaved are directly
usable to you if you're an OpenGL app.
All of the extensions we use to run the
windowing system are in the headers,
so you can use it.
So there's a session this afternoon
that talks about if you want to
leverage the windowing system,
for example,
to do transparent overlays and
just understand the model in
more detail of what we're doing,
there's the Exploring the
Quartz Compositor session
in Hall 2 this afternoon.
If you want to understand, well,
how did they actually implement
Quartz Extreme and what are the
GL extensions I need if I want
to blend three layers of video,
then you go to 506,
which is the Integrated Graphics 2 talk,
where Ken Dyke's going to walk you
through a whole example of how to
do all those layer calculations.
So that's it for the OpenGL,
Quartz Compositor,
and all of the interactive APIs.
There are some other...
Other technologies that
I want to cover here as well.
These are not technologies that
necessarily get pixels on the screen,
but there are other things in
the graphics and imaging area,
and there's some exciting
new opportunities going on.
The first one is ColorSync.
ColorSync is our standard color
calculation engine based on the
ICC standard for color matching,
which Apple helped introduce.
And you can read more
about it at color.org.
But it basically is a framework for
color calculations that represents
device transforms as profiles.
And you can string a bunch of transforms
together into a pipeline chain and
then send pixels through the chain.
And ColorSync will concatenate all
of those and create what many times
turns out to be a big 3D lookup
table to get f of RGB equals RGB out.
It's built into Quartz 2D,
so all the color handling,
as I mentioned before,
goes through ColorSync.
It's also been successfully used in
the print industry for a long time.
And it's emerging in the
film and video markets.
There's been some activity in the ICC.
Where people from that
industry have come and said,
well,
here's some special things about the real
dark surround you get in the theater.
And some new techniques for the
color workflow in film production.
And I think that there's a lot of synergy
there that could be pretty interesting.
So what's new in ColorSync is we
have a velocity engine implementation
of the color matching engine.
We have ICC4,
which is the latest profile spec.
We've added a bunch of convenience
color spaces to Quartz 2D.
So that if you want to get, for example,
the user's default RGB color space,
you can make a
straightforward call into CG.
And get that color space
and start drawing with that.
And the last thing which
is kind of interesting,
and this is just sort of emerging now,
is the ability to do real
time color correction.
Because of the GeForce 4 Ti,
which admittedly is right
now a high end card,
they have a feature called 3D Dependency.
And it's a feature that allows you
to do 3D dependent texture reads.
And what that means is you
can give a 3D texture to the
hardware and have it send RGB,
use RGB as indices into a 3D table.
And then produce an
RGBA value out the other end.
So obviously since that's a lot of what
color management calculations have to do,
I think there's some really
interesting opportunities here.
And we're going to have a demo
of actually taking a profile and
converting it to a 3D dependent texture.
And rendering it in hardware
in the ColorSync session.
So I thought what I would do here
is recreate the Keynote demo,
which uses the,
if I can get the demo machine,
uses basically the same, let's see.
Where did I start off that frame counter?
So I'm going to go into
a little more detail than
Richard Karras did in the keynote,
because it's kind of a fun
story behind this demo.
So we knew we were going to be showing
[Transcript missing]
- So that's what's going on there.
The other thing, we were also like,
what about the stage?
You know,
what do we do about all that stuff?
And the guy said, oh,
there's this thing called garbage mats,
which are these things you paint
and they composite in to get
rid of things you don't want.
So that's just a static image
that you have to render through.
So we went and did that.
And again, the hardware,
that's pretty easy.
See, I can tune out that
green a little bit more.
And then for another
piece of the color cube,
although we do the green extraction
and the matte extraction and this
color correction all in the same table,
because we just throw it all together
into one big RGB to RGBA transformation,
we made like a little brown
hue adjustment to try to get
these guys fit into the floor.
These layers also scale,
so I can kind of scale them back there.
This layer is kind of funny.
We got this layer another
three gigabytes later.
It's like, "Okay,
so this is a CG train rendered with
film noise in green screen." We're like,
"Why couldn't they have just rendered an
alpha channel from the renderer instead
of putting noise in the alpha channel?"
I guess this is the way film guys work.
So the unfortunate thing
about that is you can't,
you can see how the greens
are all over the map here,
and in fact in the corner you
can't really get rid of the,
I'm pointing at this,
you can't really get rid of all the green
the way we have the tolerances set up,
but, you know,
someone who spent more than a
day trying to get this to happen
could probably do a better job.
So you can see how that works.
They also put film noise in it.
You can see the little
pops as the train goes by.
That's all rendered in the CG layer.
I mean,
I could drag more layers in here too,
but one thing I wanted to do
that they didn't do in the
keynote is another little...
[Transcript missing]
What I'm going to do is do a print
preview of the Word document.
And what that does is create a PDF file
that then is opened up in preview.
The nice thing about Word is it
doesn't actually draw the white page.
It just leaves it clear.
So what I've actually got on
this PDF file is just the text.
And so what I can do with that is just
drag it in on a layer over the content.
That's pretty fun.
It's a little jerky,
and I'm not sure why,
but we can fix it in post, as they say.
Let's see, what else did I have?
I think that's it for that demo.
So the ColorSync session is
Session 509 on Wednesday.
You can go there and hear about how
ColorSync fits into OS X and also another
peek at how you might be able to use some
hardware to do some color correction.
Another important technology
we have is Image Capture.
Image Capture you're probably familiar
with if you've ever used iPhoto.
It's the application that
basically manages all the
cameras attached to a computer.
We introduced this last year,
and we knew the iPhoto team was
working on their application,
so we worked pretty closely with
them and all the camera vendors
to get camera modules for a lot
of the consumer-level cameras.
The way the architecture works,
basically we have an input architecture,
which is a camera module.
It flows into an Image Capture framework,
which can run as a daemon.
Then your application
attaches to the daemon,
and it can enumerate all the
cameras that are attached.
It can ask the cameras for pictures.
The Image Capture framework
isolates you from the details of
whether the camera might be a PTP,
which is a USB camera standard,
or some cameras are vendor-specific
proprietary protocols.
Some cameras are just
mass storage devices,
and they look like disks.
But all of those are kind of hidden
from you if you just ask Image Capture,
"Hey, are any cameras attached?" "Yes,
there's 30 images in it." "Okay,
give me image 5." That kind of API,
pretty straightforward.
But the new thing that we've
been working on is scanning.
So we've got scanner modules which fit in
in an analogous way to the camera modules
into the image capture architecture.
So again,
you write a module for image capture,
it can recognize it, and you can pull it
into your application.
One of the nice things we're doing
is we're integrating with Twain.
So, yeah, go ahead.
No Twain.
Twain is a good standard a lot
of vendors have adopted for
developing their scanner modules.
And we have kind of a bridge between
Twain and the image capture framework
that allows you to examine any
Twain devices on the system as well.
We've also worked with the
Twain folks on making the DSM.
If you go to their website,
they have one that's CFM only.
We've been working on a fully native
version so you can call it from Cocoa.
And it works across... across the board.
And so that'll be coming out soon.
In fact,
I think a copy of it's on your CD.
We also have a basic scanner UI.
Just like for image capture,
we have the basic image capture panel
that comes up when you attach a camera.
And we have FireWire camera support.
So some new professional cameras coming
online which have FireWire interfaces.
Here's a picture of the scanner UI.
I mean, it's pretty basic.
Just meant for like a
consumer plugs in his camera.
Wants to take... Get a scan...
A picture off the scanner.
You can see we got a little
translucent cropping rectangle.
You do a preview scan and a full scan.
Pretty straightforward.
Not a lot of bells and whistles.
But, you know,
something my mom could use kind of thing.
So if you want to hear about that,
go to the Image Capture session.
That's on Friday at 2, session 515.
The last thing I'd like
to cover is printing.
So there are some changes in printing,
but let me set the
stage a little bit here.
So in the beginning,
QuickDraw did it all.
The Mac was revolutionary in the
sense that QuickDraw was the same API.
It unified paper and display
and had nice-looking fonts
and did the whole... You know,
even just the fact that it
was black text on white,
you know,
not all computers were doing that then.
Just to try to get that simulation
of paper really nice with
the graphical user interface.
But the reality was that as people
tried to really do... The publishing
industry saw it and said,
you know, that's really cool.
We can do new applications.
But the reality was QuickDraw kind
of fell down a little bit in terms
of what it was capable to do.
It didn't have outline,
didn't have outline fonts,
didn't have a very sophisticated
processing model behind it.
And so Adobe invented PostScript.
And what happened is, you know,
QuickDraw and the platform graphics
architecture kind of got sidestepped.
By QuickDraw.
And we've been living with this
kind of combination world where,
you know, you can do some things in a
QuickDraw printer and you can do
some things in a PostScript printer.
But the real professional
imaging model is this,
you know,
total bypass shunt where people are
just sending PostScript to PostScript.
And then people who buy inkjet printers
don't get nice outline fonts and
jaggies and all of those problems.
But, you know,
PostScript was a great invention and,
you know, really proved that this
is an imaging model that,
you know,
is good enough for professionals
and can describe all the pages.
So really one way to look at
what we've done with Quartz 2D is
kind of go back to that and say,
well, you know,
let's just have a 2D API that's
kind of good enough to describe
every page ever printed and use that
and go back to the original idea
of having a unified imaging model.
And so that kind of
tells you where we're,
what our thinking was going behind
the printing architecture on OS X.
And so what happens is,
an application like a
Carbon application in this example,
Internet Explorer,
calls Quickdraw to draw its pages.
The Quickdraw commands are converted to
Core Graphics calls or Quartz 2D calls.
And those files are,
those calls are recorded into a PDF file.
That PDF file flows through what
we call a spooling system to the
back end of the print architecture
where the PDF file is decoded.
It's either converted into
PostScript for PostScript,
or rendered for a inkjet printer
using our Quartz 2D rasterizer.
So what we've done in Jaguar is
completely replace the spooling system.
So we have a new spooling system
that's based on open source,
so we think it's a really great
addition to what we have and allows
us to do some pretty new features.
But don't worry,
it's binary compatible with your apps
and with the drivers that are out there,
too.
So we've kind of ripped out most of
the kernel of the data flow processing,
but we've kept compatibility.
And this allows us to do a couple new
features that we're really excited about.
Printer sharing with IPP,
which is a better replacement to the
old USB printer sharing we had on OS 9.
And the Cocoa Print Center is
another little thing we put on there.
We took the old Print Center,
rewrote it in Cocoa,
shrunk the code size by
about a factor of six,
and it actually looks
nicer and works better.
So that was a good thing.
What are we using for a spooling system?
We're using something called
the Common Unix Printing System,
or CUPS.
It uses printer sharing via IPP.
There's a book out about it.
You can read it.
You can go to CUPS.org.
IPP is a kind of dialect of HTTP.
It uses a different port.
But basically,
the way to think about it is you're
kind of doing put of your print data,
and the server on the
other side is taking it.
So it's a replacement for kind of
the LPD kind of socket wire protocol.
But on the flip side,
as far as the Unix user is concerned,
CUPS also comes with a full set
of LPR and LP emulation tools.
So finally, you can LPR to that inkjet.
It's sitting right next to you,
which you couldn't do in 10.1.
And if you like LP, you can do that, too.
And so it's a really
flexible architecture.
If you go to this session
and hear about it,
at the back end is a really nice
kind of MIME conversion table where
you can take source formats and
convert them to destination formats.
And the spooling
architecture figures out,
you know,
how to get your source document to a
format that the printer can understand.
It's been picked up by
several Linux distributions.
And people have been really successful
using CUPS in a lot of environments,
and we're pretty happy to be working
with those guys on the OS X version.
So with that, I'm going to do the ever
popular printing demo,
rarely done on stage.
My lovely assistant
Rich will come up and help.
Rich Blanchi.
So if I could get demo four.
So what I have here is a PowerBook.
You can see it's not attached to anything
except power and video for you guys.
But it's running a wire,
it's on a wireless network.
We've got an airport card in there.
These two guys,
these two computers are on a private,
you know, little airport connection.
And what I have here
is an iMac data sheet.
And you'll see, oh, by the way,
this is the new preview.
You can see we've got
little page thumbnails now.
Anyway.
If I bring up the print dialog,
I don't have any printers because
I'm not attached to anything.
There's nothing on the network right now.
And so Rich's machine is
not attached to his printer.
He's going to attach the printer.
And what's going to happen
is that machine is going to
get the USB hot plug event,
understand that there's
a printer attached.
He's got printer sharing enabled,
so it's going to send a broadcast
packet out on the network.
And sometime in the next 30 seconds,
DeskJet 840 is going to show up here.
Now the real hard part
is can I actually print?
We have an HP printer here.
Yep, it's starting up.
So we'll leave that to print.
It's a little bit of an older printer.
No, we're on a private network.
Stay away.
Let me get back to the slides for a sec.
to tell you about the printing
sessions that are coming up.
So there's the printing in Mac OS X.
Well, you'll hear about printing APIs we
have and the architecture update.
That's on Thursday.
Tomorrow,
there's a Darwin printing session.
We've invited the guy who wrote CUPS,
Michael Sweet,
to come and talk to you about CUPS.
And all of CUPS is live
in the Darwin repository,
right, Rich?
Starting now.
So you guys can go see what the spooling
system done and the few minor changes
we had to make to make it work on OS X.
And what do you got there?
You got half a page or so?
[Transcript missing]
So the other piece of feedback we got
from all you guys was documentation.
So we're trying really hard at
this WWC to tell you about all
the documentation we've done.
We know there's still more work to do,
but in the area of general
graphics technologies,
there's been thousands of
pages of new documentation.
I'm sure there's still more you want,
but there's a bunch of revised books,
a bunch of QA samples,
some new tech notes,
and there'll be more showing
up after the conference.
We've got a bunch of new code samples,
and there'll be more showing
up after the conference.
We've got a full set of OpenGL man pages.
And don't forget about a lot of
the technologies in our area,
like PDF, PostScript, OpenGL, CUPS.
These are all things that you can
just go buy books on and read,
and that's really good, too,
so you can understand
what's going on there.
So with that, I'll just point you at
our feedback session,
which is this Friday,
last thing of the conference.
So with that, I'll just point you at
our feedback session,
which is this Friday,
last thing of the conference.
I'm sure you've all been there.
I'm sure you all are going to hang
around to give us lots of feedback.
But we'll be there
Friday at 5 in room J1.
And that's all I have.
Thanks a lot for your attention,
and have a great conference.
Thank you.